
English rock and roll band

In the 1960s a new band known as the Beatles burst on the pop musicscene and changed it forever. Band members included George Harrison(1943–2001), John Lennon (1940–1980), Paul McCartney(1942–), and Ringo Starr (1940–). With the release ofthree anthologies (collections) in the mid-1990s, the Beatles remain oneof the best-selling musical groups of all time.


Early days

The Beatles came from Liverpool, England, and were originally inspiredby the simple guitar-and-washboard style "skiffle" music.Skiffle was a lively type of acoustic (nonelectric) music that usedsongs from British and American folk and popular music. Later such U.S.pop artists as Elvis Presley (1935–1977), Buddy Holly(1936–1959), and Little Richard (1932–) influenced them.All four members of the Beatles had an early interest in music.

The Beatles started when John Lennon formed his own group, called theQuarrymen, in 1956. Paul McCartney joined the group as a guitarist in1957. Fourteen-yearold George Harrison, though a skilled guitarist, didnot initially impress seventeen-year-old Lennon, but eventually won apermanent spot in the developing group. The

Beatles went through several additional members as well as throughseveral name changes. After the Quarrymen they became Johnny and theMoondogs. Later they called themselves the Silver Beatles, and,eventually, simply The Beatles. They played not only in Liverpool, butalso in Scotland and in Hamburg, Germany, in 1960.

When the Beatles' bass player, Stu Sutcliffe, decided to leave,McCartney took over that instrument. Upon their return to England, arecord shop manager named Brian Epstein approached the band aboutbecoming their manager. Within a year of signing Epstein on as manager,the Beatles gained a recording contract from EMI Records producer GeorgeMartin. Drummer Pete Best left the group and a sad-eyed drummer namedRichard Starkey, better known as Ringo Starr, joined.

Despite initial doubts, George Martin agreed to use Lennon and McCartneyoriginals on both sides of the Beatles' first single."Love Me Do," released on October 5, 1962, convincedMartin that, with the right material, the Beatles could achieve a numberone record. He was proven correct.



First successes

The Beatles' "Please Please Me," released inBritain on January 12, 1963, was an immediate hit. The Beatles'first British album, recorded in one thirteen-hour session, remainednumber one on the charts for six months. The United States remaineduninterested until, one month before the Beatles' arrival,EMI's U.S. company, Capitol Records, launched an unprecedented(never done before) fifty thousand dollar promotional campaign. Thepublicity and the Beatles' American tour-opening performance on The Ed Sullivan Show, the most popular entertainment show on television at the time, paid offhandsomely. They were given the nicknames "The Fab Four"and "The Mop Tops" (because of their hair styles). Thedevotion of their fans was called Beatlemania.

The Beatles' "I Want to Hold Your Hand," releasedin the United States in January 1964, hit number one within three weeks.After seven weeks at the top of the charts, it dropped to number two tomake room for "She Loves You," which gave way to"Can't Buy Me Love." As many as three new songs aweek were released, until, on April 4,1964, the Beatles held the top five slots on the Billboard (a recordingindustry publication) list of top sellers. They also had another sevensongs in the top one hundred, plus four album positions, including thetop two. One week later fourteen of the top one hundred songs were theBeatles'—a feat that had never been matched before, norhas it since.


New career in movies



Also in 1964 the Beatles appeared in the first of several innovativefull-length feature films. Shot in black-and-white and well-received bycritics, A Hard Day's Night was a fictional representation of a day in the life of the group.Critics and fans loved it. Help was released in July 1965. It was a madcap (recklessly foolish) fantasyfilmed in color. Exotic locations in Europe and the Bahamas made Help visually more interesting than the first film, but critics were lessimpressed.


Growth and controversy

The Beatles' 1965 and 1966 albums Rubber Soul and Revolver marked a turning point in the band's recording history. The mostoriginal of their collections to date, both combined Eastern,country-western, soul, and classical motifs with trend-setting covers,breaking any mold that seemed to define "rock and roll."In both albums balladry (songs that tell stories), classicalinstrumentation, and new structure resulted in brilliant new concepts.Songs such as "Tomorrow Never Knows," "EleanorRigby," and the lyrical "Norwegian Wood" made useof sophisticated (subtle and complex) recording techniques. This was thebeginning of the end for the group's touring, since liveperformances of such songs were technically impossible at the time.

The Beatles became further distanced from their fans, when, in aninterview with a London Evening Standard writer, Lennon said, "We're more popular than JesusChrist now." Later Lennon said he was misunderstood. SomeAmerican teenagers took Lennon's words literally, however. Theyburned Beatles' albums, and the group finished their last U.S.tour amid riots and death threats.


The change of rock and roll

Acclaimed by critics, with advance sales of more than one million, theBeatles' Sgt. Pepper's Lonely Hearts Club Band (1967) was perhaps the high point of their recording career. It was notsimply a "collection" of Lennon-McCartney and Harrisonoriginals. Presented in a stunning and evocative album package, it wasthematically (everything related to one idea) whole and artisticallypleasing. Most critics believe it will remain timeless. It containsimaginative melodies and songs about many life experiences, philosophy,and unusual imagery. The Beatles' music had evolved from catchylove songs to profound ballads and social commentary. Trying new thingsseemed to be an essential part of the Beatles' lives. Influencedgreatly by Harrison's interest in India, the Beatles visited theMaharishi Mahesh Yogi in India.


The long winding road down

The Beatles' next cooperative project was the scripting anddirecting of another film, Magical Mystery Tour (1967) for the British Broadcasting Company (BBC). It was anunrehearsed, unorganized failure. Intended to be fresh, it drewcriticism as a compilation of adolescent humor, gag bits, andundisciplined boredom. The accompanying album, however,featured polished studio numbers such as McCartney's"Fool on the Hill" and Lennon's "I Am theWalrus," as well as "Penny Lane," "HelloGoodbye," and "Strawberry Fields Forever," whichwere not included in the film.

Growing differences between artistic approaches pointed to the Beatlesbreaking up. In 1968 they recorded a two-record set, simply called The Beatles. It was the first album released by the group's new recordcompany, Apple. The White Album, as it was commonly known, had a variety of songs that had no connectionto each other and, some felt, that were often difficult to understand.There particularly appeared to be a growing break between Lennon andMcCartney. McCartney contributed ballads like "Blackbird,"while Lennon gave antiwar statements like "Revolution" andmade fun of the Maharishi. Harrison, on the other hand, shone in"While My Guitar Gently Weeps," aided by EricClapton's tasteful guitar solo. For the first time Starr wasallotted the space for an original, the country-western"Don't Pass Me By," which became a number-one hitin Scandinavia (northern Europe), where it was released as a single.

The Beatles' animated feature film Yellow Submarine was released in July 1968. A fantasy about the Beatles battling againstthe Blue Meanies, the film was visually pleasing, but did not make muchmoney when it was first released.

The remainder of 1968 and 1969 saw the individual Beatles continuing towork apart. Starr appeared in the film The Magic Christian. Lennon performed live outside the Beatles in a group called the PlasticOno Band with his wife Yoko Ono (1933–).


Last works

The Beatles spent months filming and recording for Let It Be. It was supposed to be a film of how the group worked together. It endedup as a film showing the group falling apart. Editing would have maderelease before 1970 impossible, so the project was put on hold. Instead,for the final time, the Beatles gathered to produce an album "theway we used to do it," as McCartney was quoted in PhilipNorman's book, Shout! The result was as stunning as Sgt. Pepper had been. All their problems seemed to vanish on the album Abbey Road (1969). The Beatles were at their best. The album contained suchclassics as "Come Together," "GoldenSlumbers," "Octopus's Garden," andHarrison's "Here Comes the Sun" and"Some-thing," which Lennon hailed the best track on thealbum. They won yet another Grammy Award.

American producer Phil Spector (1940–) took over theBeatles' Let It Be project in 1970. The resulting film and album, released in 1971, gotmixed reviews. Band members were seen quarreling and unresponsive toMcCartney's attempts to raise morale (spirit). By the end of 1970all four Beatles had recorded solo albums. In 1971 McCartney sued tolegally end the group. Throughout the 1970s promoters attempted toreunite them without success.


The end of an era

Mark David Chapman murdered John Lennon on December 8, 1980, in New YorkCity, New York. In the mid-1990s, however, new music was released underthe original band name. The remaining Beatles played over songs Lennonhad left on tape. The singles"Free as a Bird" and "Real Love" werereleased as parts of anthologies featuring material from earlier Beatlesrecording sessions.

George Harrison died on November 29, 2001, in Los Angeles, California,of brain cancer. Both Paul McCartney and Ringo Starr continue to record.The Beatles were a major influence not only in rock and roll but also inthe creation of modern popular music. The Beatles were inducted into theRock and Roll Hall of Fame in 1988. Lennon and McCartney have also beeninducted as solo performers






